## About Icelandic

Icelandic is the language of Iceland.

At the end of the 9th century, Vikings and settlers from Norway began moving to Iceland. At the time, all Scandinavians spoke the same language and worshipped the god Óðinn. The Viking Age ended in the 11th century.

Sailing to Iceland wasn't easy. The inhabitants of Iceland were isolated for most of the year, usually only a few merchant ships visited each year. On the mainland of Europe, cultures could intermingle and languages affected each other. The Scandinavian languages slowly lost much of their inflections (the modification of words to express different grammatical categories) and borrowed quite a few words from German, French, and Latin.

All languages change over time, but since Iceland was fairly isolated the Icelandic language didn't change as much as its relatives. Being able to understand text written in the 1200s is a matter of national pride for many Icelanders today.

The period of Romanticism swept Europe in the 1800s. Glorification of nature and the past was a popular theme, which is exactly what happened in Iceland. Love for nature, love for the heroic sagas of the Vikings, and love for the language all kindled patriotism. Foreign influences on the language were stamped out, especially Danish and Latin influences. This practice is called _linguistic purism_ and is to this day very popular in Iceland. Although foreign slang or loan words are sometimes used colloquially (nowadays most often from English), it is considered hideous to do so in written language. So, Icelanders create their own words for most new concepts. A _robot_ is _vélmenni_ (mechanical-man), a _helicopter_ is _þyrla_ (a whirler), _mathematics_ is _stærðfræði_ (the study of sizes). That can be a bit annoying for a foreigner who is learning the language, but it is usually not too much of a difficulty.

The closest relative to Icelandic is Faroese, the language of the Faroe islands. They are not mutually intelligible when spoken, only when written. `[This is a bit of a loose remark compared to the previous. Maybe new subchapter?]`

Icelandic's other close relatives are the Scandinavian languages: Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish. The Scandinavian languages are quite similar to each other, but they haven't been mutually understandable with Icelandic since about 1300.

Icelandic and English are also related languages, but they split much earlier, in the year 200. `[At that time English didn’t exist; only developed from dialects around 500. It appears in the British Isles they spoke Brittonic and Latin. But maybe you mean the language the Anglos spoke?]` Viking colonisation of England in the 10th century also left influences on the English language. You will notice that many Icelandic words look familiar.

Currently 330,000 people speak Icelandic (and soon you will as well).



## Is Icelandic difficult to learn?

All languages are difficult. It usually takes years for someone to become truly proficient at a new language.

Icelandic is sometimes joked about as being an impossibly difficult language, because of its creation of new words and its unfamiliar inflections.

For an average English speaker, learning Icelandic does indeed take a bit more time than learning Swedish, French, or Spanish. But Icelandic isn't any more difficult than Russian, Polish, or Greek, and it is considerably easier than Japanese, Chinese, or Arabic for a speaker of English.

Learning some words and grammar isn't that difficult. The most difficult thing about language learning is having the motivation and discipline to continue studying just a little bit each day, finding good material with at an appropriate level, and to consistently expose oneself to the language.

We hope that with Ylhýra we can ease the pain of most of these difficulties, making it viable for you to study the language by yourself.




## When will I become good at Icelandic?

You won't become conversational in a new language overnight. It can take a few weeks until you can comfortably greet people, several months for you to be able to chit chat out on the street, and a few years until you can take part in a heated argument.

So, how long will it realistically take you to get to these steps:

[European Language Scale]

It can be difficult to start out with a new language, especially without the support and supervision that language classes bring. Self-studying does indeed require some discipline.
We recommend taking the following path to learn Icelandic:

- **Starting out** – Focus on learning words and phrases. Do not study the grammar for now. It is more important to use several words incorrectly than it is to know only a handful of words correctly.

- **Beginner** – Slowly we will introduce you to a bit of grammar. Practice speaking slowly and become good at phrases. Now you can start listening to Icelandic songs and movies, attempting to catch some words. Finding a language partner to speak with regularly is vital.

- **Intermediate** – Surround yourself with the language. Listen to radio shows in the mornings, read a little bit every day. Watch dubbed & subtitled children's television. Speak with a language partner regularly.

- **Advanced** – Read books. Start with books for children and then move over to longer books. Speak with a language partner regularly.




## How well could I survive by only speaking English in Iceland?

English is currently the world's _lingua franca_, meaning it's often used as a common ground in trade and between people who don't share a language.

Like in the rest of Northern Europe, most Icelanders are adequate at English. You can indeed survive here by only communicating in English.

However, you will always be a bit left out. The news is in Icelandic, your local friends will switch over to Icelandic when addressing each other.

If you are a tourist, knowing Icelandic is not _necessary_. Being able to communicate with locals will mainly gather you respect, as people are interested in someone who is willing to attempt to learn their language.

If you plan on living in Iceland for a while, learning the languages becomes a necessity. It is the only way to integrate well into the society.

For a student of Icelandic, it can be a bit tiring when the bartender switches over to English when he notices you stumbling on your order. Usually this is because they aren't very used to encountering someone like you, and they are only attempting to be helpful. However, you absolutely must not give up in these situations. If you continue to speak your Icelandic, broken though it may be, the person you're speaking to will get the hint.
